Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the cell membrane and membrane transport. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the structure of the cell membrane.
The cell membrane is described by the fluid-mosaic model.
Its foundation is a phospholipid bilayer:
each phospholipid has a hydrophilic phosphate head and two hydrophobic fatty-acid
tails, and in water they self-assemble into a double layer with the heads facing
the aqueous interior and exterior and the tails meeting in the middle,
forming a barrier to water-soluble substances.
It is fluid because the lipids move within the layer,
the fluidity modulated by cholesterol interspersed among them and by the degree of
saturation of the fatty acids.
It is a mosaic because proteins are embedded in or attached to it — integral
proteins spanning the bilayer and peripheral proteins on its surfaces — acting as
channels, carriers, pumps, receptors, enzymes and anchors.
A carbohydrate coat, the glycocalyx, faces outward for recognition.
So the cell membrane is a fluid phospholipid bilayer,
its hydrophobic core a barrier to water-soluble molecules,
with cholesterol regulating fluidity and a mosaic of embedded proteins providing
transport, signalling and recognition — the fluid-mosaic model.
Describe simple diffusion and the law that governs it.
Simple diffusion is the passive net movement of molecules from a region of higher
to one of lower concentration, down the concentration gradient,
driven by their random thermal motion, requiring no energy and no carrier,
and continuing until equilibrium.
Across the cell membrane, lipid-soluble substances — oxygen,
carbon dioxide and lipophilic drugs — and small uncharged molecules diffuse
directly through the lipid bilayer.
The rate is governed by Fick's law of diffusion,
which states that the rate of diffusion is proportional to the surface area
available and to the concentration gradient across the membrane,
and to the diffusion coefficient of the substance,
and is inversely proportional to the thickness of the membrane.
The diffusion coefficient itself depends on the size of the molecule and the nature
of the membrane.
So simple diffusion is passive movement down a concentration gradient through the
lipid bilayer, governed by Fick's law — the rate proportional to area,
concentration gradient and diffusion coefficient,
and inversely proportional to membrane thickness — the route for gases and
lipophilic substances.
Describe facilitated diffusion and osmosis.
Both are forms of passive transport, needing no energy.
Facilitated diffusion is the passive movement of a substance down its concentration
gradient, but with the help of a membrane protein — either a channel or a carrier —
because the substance, being water-soluble or charged,
cannot cross the lipid bilayer directly;
glucose entry via its transporter and ion movement through channels are examples.
Because it depends on a finite number of proteins,
it shows saturation and specificity, unlike simple diffusion.
Osmosis is the passive net movement of water across a semipermeable membrane from a
region of lower solute concentration to one of higher — that is,
down water's own concentration gradient — driven by the difference in solute
concentration.
The osmotic pressure is the pressure that would just prevent this water movement,
proportional to the number of osmotically active particles.
So facilitated diffusion is protein-assisted passive transport of substances that
cannot cross the lipid directly, showing saturation,
and osmosis is the passive movement of water across a semipermeable membrane
towards the higher solute concentration, quantified by osmotic pressure.
Describe ion channels.
Ion channels are integral membrane proteins forming water-filled pores that allow
specific ions to pass across the membrane down their electrochemical gradient,
at very high rates, providing the basis of electrical signalling.
They have two key properties: selectivity — a selectivity filter allows only
particular ions through, so we speak of sodium, potassium,
calcium and chloride channels; and gating — the channel opens and closes in
response to a stimulus.
Voltage-gated channels open in response to a change in membrane potential and
underlie the action potential. Ligand-gated channels open on binding a chemical
messenger, as the nicotinic receptor opens to acetylcholine.
There are also mechanically gated channels and leak channels that are open at rest,
the potassium leak channels being central to the resting membrane potential.
So ion channels are selective, gated protein pores allowing rapid passive ion
movement down electrochemical gradients — voltage-gated, ligand-gated,
mechanically gated and leak — forming the basis of electrical signalling and being
important drug targets.
Describe carrier-mediated transport and its difference from channels.
Carrier-mediated transport moves substances across the membrane by means of a
carrier protein that binds the substance on one side,
undergoes a conformational change, and releases it on the other side.
This differs from channels, which form an open pore for rapid flow;
carriers physically bind and shuttle their substrate, so they are much slower,
and because they have a finite number of binding sites they show saturation — a
maximum transport rate — specificity for their substrate, and competition.
Carriers may move one substance alone, a uniport; two in the same direction,
a symport or cotransport; or two in opposite directions, an antiport or exchanger.
They may operate passively, as in facilitated diffusion,
or actively against a gradient.
So carrier-mediated transport binds and shuttles substrates by conformational
change, slower than channels and showing saturation, specificity and competition,
operating as uniporters, symporters or antiporters — the mechanism of both
facilitated diffusion and active transport,
distinguished from the open pores of channels.
Describe primary active transport and the sodium-potassium pump.
Primary active transport moves a substance across the membrane against its
electrochemical gradient using energy derived directly from the hydrolysis of
adenosine triphosphate by the transport protein itself,
which is therefore an ATPase.
The prime example is the sodium-potassium pump, present in all cells,
which for each molecule of adenosine triphosphate hydrolysed extrudes three sodium
ions from the cell and imports two potassium ions, both against their gradients.
This is fundamental: it maintains the low intracellular sodium and high
intracellular potassium that establish the resting membrane potential and the
gradients for excitability and for secondary transport;
because it moves three positive charges out for two in, it is electrogenic,
contributing slightly to the negative resting potential;
and it consumes a large share of the body's energy.
Other examples are the calcium ATPase and the proton-potassium ATPase.
So primary active transport uses ATP hydrolysis directly to pump substances against
their gradient, the sodium-potassium pump extruding three sodium for two potassium
per ATP, maintaining the ionic gradients essential for excitability — electrogenic
and energetically costly.
Describe secondary active transport.
Secondary active transport moves a substance against its electrochemical gradient
without using adenosine triphosphate directly;
instead it harnesses the energy stored in the gradient of another ion — usually
sodium — that was itself established by the primary active transport of the
sodium-potassium pump.
As sodium moves back into the cell down its gradient through a carrier,
the energy released is used to drive a second substance against its gradient.
If the two move in the same direction it is a symport,
or cotransport — as in the sodium-glucose cotransporter that absorbs glucose in the
gut and kidney against its gradient; if in opposite directions, an antiport,
or exchange — as in the sodium-calcium exchanger that extrudes calcium.
Because it depends on the sodium gradient maintained by the pump,
it depends indirectly on adenosine triphosphate.
So secondary active transport drives one substance against its gradient using the
energy of the sodium gradient established by the sodium-potassium pump — as
symport, like the sodium-glucose cotransporter, or antiport,
like the sodium-calcium exchanger — indirectly powered by adenosine triphosphate.
Describe endocytosis, exocytosis and aquaporins.
These handle bulk transport and water movement.
Endocytosis is the uptake of material by the inward folding of the membrane to form
a vesicle that internalises it — phagocytosis for large particles,
pinocytosis for fluid, and receptor-mediated endocytosis for specific molecules
bound to surface receptors.
Exocytosis is the reverse: a vesicle fuses with the membrane to release its
contents outside, the mechanism of secretion,
including of neurotransmitters and hormones.
Both move large or impermeant materials that cannot cross by the other routes,
and both require energy.
Aquaporins are membrane channel proteins that form pores selectively permeable to
water, greatly accelerating its movement across the membrane by osmosis;
they are important where rapid water transport is needed,
as in the renal collecting duct, where antidiuretic hormone regulates their
insertion.
So endocytosis and exocytosis move bulk material in and out by vesicle formation
and fusion, the basis of uptake and secretion,
and aquaporins are selective water channels that accelerate osmotic water movement,
notably in the kidney under hormonal control.
What is the relevance of membrane transport to anaesthesia?
Membrane transport is fundamental to anaesthesia in several ways.
The lipid bilayer determines how drugs cross membranes: lipid-soluble,
unionised drugs diffuse readily, so the degree of ionisation,
governed by the drug's pKa and the local pH,
determines the fraction able to cross — the basis of pH partitioning and of why
local anaesthetics, weak bases, are less effective in acidic infected tissue.
Ion channels are direct drug targets — local anaesthetics block voltage-gated
sodium channels, and general anaesthetics modulate ligand-gated channels.
The sodium-potassium pump maintains the gradients underlying excitability,
and its failure in ischaemia causes cellular swelling and injury.
Carrier and channel function underlies the action of many drugs and the handling of
electrolytes.
So membrane transport is central to anaesthesia:
the lipid bilayer and ionisation govern drug crossing and pH partitioning,
ion channels are the targets of local and general anaesthetics,
and the ion pumps maintain the excitability that anaesthesia and ischaemia modify —
transport physiology underlying both drug action and cellular integrity.
Pull it together: classify the mechanisms of membrane transport.
I would classify membrane transport first by whether it requires energy.
Passive transport needs no energy and moves substances down their electrochemical
gradient: simple diffusion of lipid-soluble substances and gases directly through
the bilayer, governed by Fick's law;
facilitated diffusion of water-soluble substances through channels or carriers;
the movement of ions through channels; and osmosis of water,
accelerated by aquaporins.
Active transport moves substances against their gradient and needs energy:
primary active transport using adenosine triphosphate directly,
as the sodium-potassium pump; and secondary active transport using the sodium
gradient, as symport or antiport.
Bulk transport — endocytosis and exocytosis — moves large materials by vesicles.
Each mechanism is matched to the substance and the direction required.
So membrane transport is classified into passive movement down gradients — simple
and facilitated diffusion, channels and osmosis — active movement against gradients
by primary and secondary active transport, and bulk vesicular transport,
a framework that explains how the cell controls its internal composition and how
drugs cross.
State Fick's law of diffusion fully and describe the relationship graphically.
Fick's law of diffusion describes the rate at which a substance diffuses passively
across a membrane.
In words, the rate of diffusion is directly proportional to the surface area
available for diffusion, to the concentration gradient across the membrane,
and to a diffusion coefficient for the substance,
and is inversely proportional to the thickness of the membrane.
The diffusion coefficient itself is greater for smaller and more lipid-soluble
molecules and, by Graham's law, is inversely related to the square root of the
molecular weight.
Plotted as the rate of diffusion on the vertical axis against the concentration
gradient on the horizontal axis, simple diffusion gives a straight line through the
origin — the rate rising linearly and without limit as the gradient increases,
with no saturation, which distinguishes it from carrier-mediated transport.
So Fick's law states that diffusion rate is proportional to area,
concentration gradient and diffusion coefficient and inversely proportional to
thickness; graphed against the gradient it is a straight line through the origin
with no saturation — the hallmark of simple diffusion,
the route for gases and lipophilic drugs.
How does the degree of ionisation determine whether a drug crosses the membrane?
Because the membrane's lipid core admits lipid-soluble,
unionised molecules but resists charged, ionised ones,
the proportion of a drug in its unionised form determines how readily it crosses,
and this depends on the drug's dissociation constant and the local pH.
Most drugs are weak acids or weak bases,
and the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship gives the ratio of ionised to unionised
drug: the ratio depends on the difference between the pH and the drug's pK-a,
the pK-a being the pH at which the drug is half ionised.
A weak base is more unionised, and so more able to cross,
in an alkaline environment, and more ionised and trapped in an acidic one;
a weak acid the reverse. This explains pH partitioning and ion trapping — for
example, a weak base accumulating on the acidic side of a membrane.
So the degree of ionisation, governed by the drug's pK-a and the local pH through
the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship,
determines the unionised fraction able to cross the lipid membrane — the basis of
pH partitioning and ion trapping, important for drug absorption and distribution.
Explain tonicity and its effect on cell volume.
Tonicity describes the effect of a solution on the volume of a cell placed in it,
and it depends only on the solutes that cannot cross the cell membrane and so exert
an effective osmotic force across it — distinguishing it from osmolality,
which counts all solutes.
An isotonic solution has the same effective osmotic pressure as the cell interior,
so there is no net water movement and the cell volume is unchanged — as with normal
saline.
A hypotonic solution has a lower effective osmotic pressure,
so water moves into the cell, which swells and may burst, or lyse.
A hypertonic solution has a higher effective osmotic pressure,
so water leaves the cell, which shrinks, or crenates.
This is why the tonicity of intravenous fluids matters,
and why iso-osmolar but membrane-permeant solutions such as dextrose behave as
hypotonic once the glucose is taken up.
So tonicity is the effect of a solution on cell volume,
set by membrane-impermeant solutes: isotonic leaves volume unchanged,
hypotonic swells and may lyse the cell,
hypertonic shrinks it — a key determinant of the safety of intravenous fluids.
Describe the gating of ion channels.
Gating is the opening and closing of an ion channel in response to a stimulus,
which controls when ions may pass and so the timing of electrical signals.
Different channels are gated by different stimuli.
Voltage-gated channels possess a charged voltage-sensor region that moves in
response to a change in membrane potential,
opening the channel — the basis of the action potential's sodium and potassium
channels.
Ligand-gated channels open when a chemical messenger binds,
either an extracellular transmitter, as at the nicotinic receptor,
or an intracellular ligand. Mechanically gated channels open in response to
membrane stretch or deformation, important in sensory receptors.
Many channels also inactivate — a separate process closing them despite a
continuing stimulus, as the sodium channel inactivates during the action potential,
contributing to the refractory period.
So ion-channel gating opens and closes the pore in response to a stimulus —
voltage, a ligand, or mechanical force — with some channels also inactivating;
gating determines the timing of ion flow and hence of electrical and chemical
signalling, and is a target of drugs.
Describe carrier kinetics and the concept of transport maximum.
Carrier-mediated transport, because it depends on a finite number of carrier
proteins each binding and shuttling its substrate,
shows kinetics analogous to enzyme kinetics, quite unlike simple diffusion.
As the substrate concentration rises, the rate of transport increases,
but only until all the carriers are occupied;
beyond that the carriers are saturated and the rate plateaus at a maximum,
the transport maximum.
Plotted as transport rate against substrate concentration,
this gives a curve that rises and then flattens to a plateau — a rectangular
hyperbola — in contrast to the straight, non-saturating line of simple diffusion.
Carriers also show specificity for their substrate and competition between similar
substrates.
A clinical example is the renal reabsorption of glucose:
below the transport maximum all filtered glucose is reabsorbed,
but once the plasma glucose exceeds the threshold that saturates the carriers,
glucose appears in the urine.
So carrier transport shows saturable, hyperbolic kinetics with a transport maximum,
plus specificity and competition — illustrated by the renal glucose threshold,
and distinguished from the non-saturating straight line of simple diffusion.
Describe the sodium-potassium pump in more detail and its energy cost.
The sodium-potassium pump, or sodium-potassium ATPase,
is an integral membrane protein present in every cell,
performing primary active transport.
In each cycle it binds three sodium ions from inside the cell and,
using the energy from hydrolysing one molecule of adenosine triphosphate,
undergoes a conformational change that extrudes them,
then binds two potassium ions from outside and imports them,
both ions being moved against their electrochemical gradients.
It is therefore electrogenic, moving net positive charge outward,
contributing a few millivolts to the negative resting potential.
Its functions are to maintain the low intracellular sodium and high potassium
underlying the resting potential and excitability,
to provide the sodium gradient that powers secondary active transport,
and to regulate cell volume by controlling intracellular solute.
It is energetically expensive, consuming a substantial fraction — a quarter or more
— of the body's resting energy, more in excitable tissues.
So the sodium-potassium pump extrudes three sodium and imports two potassium per
adenosine triphosphate, electrogenically maintaining the gradients for
excitability, secondary transport and volume regulation,
at a large energy cost — a fundamental and costly cellular process.
Explain the Gibbs-Donnan effect.
The Gibbs-Donnan effect describes the unequal distribution of diffusible ions that
arises across a semipermeable membrane when one side contains charged particles
that cannot cross — typically the negatively charged proteins inside cells and in
plasma.
Because these impermeant anions are fixed on one side,
they attract diffusible cations and repel diffusible anions,
so at equilibrium the diffusible ions distribute unequally to maintain both
electrical neutrality and the balance of electrochemical forces,
with the products of the diffusible ion concentrations equal on each side.
The consequences are physiologically important:
there is a slightly higher total solute concentration and so osmotic pressure on
the protein-containing side, contributing to the tendency of water to move into
cells and into the plasma, and it contributes to the membrane potential.
The cell counteracts the resulting osmotic tendency by pumping out sodium.
So the Gibbs-Donnan effect is the unequal distribution of diffusible ions caused by
impermeant charged proteins, producing an osmotic and electrical imbalance that the
cell must counteract — relevant to cell volume, the resting potential,
and the distribution of ions across the capillary wall.
Describe the lipid theories of anaesthesia and the Meyer-Overton correlation.
The lipid theories were the historical attempt to explain how the chemically
diverse general anaesthetics share their effect,
and they arose from a striking physical observation.
The Meyer-Overton correlation is the finding that the potency of an inhalational
anaesthetic correlates closely with its solubility in lipid,
or oil — the more lipid-soluble the agent,
the lower the partial pressure needed to produce anaesthesia,
so that potency parallels the oil-gas partition coefficient over many orders of
magnitude.
This suggested that anaesthetics act by dissolving in the lipid of the cell
membrane and perturbing it, the lipid theory.
However, this view has been largely superseded:
the correlation reflects that anaesthetics reach a hydrophobic site,
but that site is now understood to be specific hydrophobic pockets on membrane
proteins — particularly ligand-gated ion channels such as the GABA-A receptor —
rather than the lipid itself.
So the Meyer-Overton correlation links anaesthetic potency to lipid solubility,
which inspired the lipid theory that anaesthetics dissolve in and perturb the
membrane lipid; modern understanding instead places their action at hydrophobic
sites on specific membrane proteins,
the lipid solubility merely reflecting access to these sites.
Summarise how membrane properties determine drug pharmacokinetics.
The properties of the cell membrane directly shape how drugs are absorbed,
distributed, and eliminated.
Because the membrane's lipid core admits unionised lipid-soluble molecules and
resists charged ones, a drug's lipid solubility and its degree of ionisation — set
by its pK-a and the local pH through the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship —
determine how readily it crosses membranes, governing its absorption from the gut,
its distribution into tissues and across the blood-brain and placental barriers,
and phenomena such as pH partitioning and ion trapping.
Carrier and transporter proteins handle drugs that cannot diffuse,
with saturable kinetics and the potential for competition and interactions,
including the efflux transporters that limit drug entry.
The membrane is also the site of the drug's target — the receptors and channels
embedded in it.
So membrane properties determine drug pharmacokinetics:
lipid solubility and ionisation govern diffusion across membranes and barriers and
pH partitioning, transporters handle non-diffusible drugs with saturable,
interacting kinetics, and the membrane carries the drug targets — the physical
chemistry of the membrane underlying absorption, distribution and action.
State Graham's law and its relevance to diffusion.
Graham's law concerns the influence of molecular size on the rate of diffusion of a
gas or a solute.
It states that the rate of diffusion of a substance is inversely proportional to
the square root of its molecular weight — so a lighter molecule diffuses faster
than a heavier one, the difference following the square root,
not the weight directly.
This is incorporated into the diffusion coefficient of Fick's law.
Physiologically it has a particular relevance to the diffusion of gases in the
lung: carbon dioxide and oxygen.
Although carbon dioxide is the heavier molecule and so by Graham's law alone would
diffuse a little more slowly, its very much greater solubility — by Henry's law —
dominates, so that overall carbon dioxide diffuses across the alveolar membrane
around twenty times faster than oxygen.
So Graham's law states that diffusion rate is inversely proportional to the square
root of molecular weight, lighter molecules diffusing faster;
it contributes to the diffusion coefficient,
but for the respiratory gases solubility outweighs it,
so the heavier carbon dioxide nonetheless diffuses far faster than oxygen.
Distinguish osmolality, osmolarity and tonicity clearly.
These related terms are often confused but are distinct.
Osmolarity is the number of osmotically active particles per litre of solution,
and osmolality the number per kilogram of solvent — in dilute body fluids the two
are nearly equal, and both count all the solute particles present,
whether or not they cross membranes.
Plasma osmolality is normally about two hundred and eighty-five to two hundred and
ninety-five milliosmoles per kilogram, contributed mainly by sodium and its anions,
with glucose and urea.
Tonicity, by contrast, is not a measured concentration but the effect of a solution
on cell volume, and it depends only on the solutes that cannot cross the cell
membrane and so exert an effective osmotic force — urea, which crosses freely,
adds to osmolality but not to tonicity.
So osmolality and osmolarity measure the total particle concentration,
per kilogram of solvent or per litre of solution respectively,
counting all solutes, whereas tonicity describes the effect on cell volume and
counts only membrane-impermeant solutes — a distinction that explains why an
iso-osmolar solution of a permeant solute can still be effectively hypotonic.
Give further examples of secondary active transport and their importance.
Secondary active transport, powered by the sodium gradient maintained by the
sodium-potassium pump, is widespread and physiologically vital,
especially in epithelia.
In the kidney and gut, the sodium-glucose cotransporter and sodium-amino-acid
cotransporters use the inward sodium gradient to absorb glucose and amino acids
against their gradients — a symport.
The sodium-hydrogen exchanger, an antiport,
extrudes hydrogen ions in exchange for sodium,
important in cellular pH regulation and in renal acid handling and bicarbonate
reabsorption.
The sodium-calcium exchanger uses the sodium gradient to extrude calcium,
important in cardiac and other cells. The sodium-potassium-two-chloride
cotransporter in the renal loop, the target of loop diuretics,
drives salt reabsorption.
So secondary active transport, harnessing the sodium gradient,
drives a wide range of vital processes — glucose and amino-acid absorption by
cotransport, hydrogen extrusion and pH regulation by the sodium-hydrogen exchanger,
calcium extrusion by the sodium-calcium exchanger,
and renal salt handling by the sodium-potassium-two-chloride cotransporter — making
the sodium gradient the cell's secondary energy currency for transport.
Describe aquaporins and their regulation by antidiuretic hormone.
Aquaporins are a family of integral membrane proteins forming channels that are
selectively permeable to water, allowing it to cross the membrane far faster than
by diffusion through the lipid alone, while excluding ions and solutes.
They are abundant where rapid water movement is needed — in the renal tubule,
red cells, and secretory epithelia. Their physiological importance is shown by
their regulation in the kidney.
In the collecting duct, the water permeability is controlled by antidiuretic
hormone: when it acts on its receptor,
through a cyclic adenosine monophosphate cascade it causes aquaporin-two channels
to be inserted into the apical membrane, making the duct permeable to water,
which is then reabsorbed, concentrating the urine.
Without the hormone, the channels are withdrawn and the duct is water-impermeable,
producing dilute urine.
So aquaporins are selective water channels that accelerate osmotic water movement;
in the renal collecting duct, antidiuretic hormone regulates water reabsorption by
inserting aquaporin-two channels into the membrane — the molecular basis of urinary
concentration and of disorders such as diabetes insipidus.
Explain ion trapping with physiological and pharmacological examples.
Ion trapping is the accumulation of an ionisable substance on one side of a
membrane because of a pH difference across it, following from pH partitioning.
Because only the unionised form crosses the membrane freely,
a weak acid or base that crosses in its unionised form and then becomes ionised on
the far side, in a different pH, is unable to cross back and so accumulates,
or is trapped, on that side.
A pharmacological example concerns local anaesthetics, weak bases:
they cross into a cell unionised, and in a more acidic intracellular or fetal
compartment more becomes ionised and is trapped.
A clinically important example is the placenta:
a weak base such as a local anaesthetic or opioid crossing to the more acidic fetal
blood becomes more ionised and trapped in the fetus,
which is exaggerated if the fetus is acidotic and distressed.
So ion trapping is the accumulation of an ionisable drug on the side of a membrane
where the pH favours its ionised, impermeant form — illustrated by the trapping of
weak bases in acidic fetal blood across the placenta,
of particular relevance in obstetric anaesthesia and fetal distress.
Do non-excitable cells have a membrane potential, and what is its role?
Yes — essentially all cells, not only the excitable nerve and muscle cells,
have a resting membrane potential across their membranes,
generated in the same way by the ionic gradients maintained by the sodium-potassium
pump and the membrane's selective permeability, chiefly to potassium.
The difference is that non-excitable cells — such as epithelial cells,
red cells and most others — cannot generate a propagating action potential,
lacking the necessary density of voltage-gated channels.
Their membrane potential nonetheless has important roles:
it provides the electrical driving force for the transport of ions and of
substances by secondary active transport across epithelia;
it influences cell volume; and in some secretory and endocrine cells,
changes in membrane potential, though not full action potentials,
couple stimulus to secretion — as the closure of potassium channels depolarises the
pancreatic beta cell to trigger insulin release.
So non-excitable cells do have a resting membrane potential,
generated like that of excitable cells but without the capacity for a propagating
action potential; it drives transport, influences volume,
and in some cells couples stimulus to secretion — a universal cellular property
with diverse roles.
Describe the subtypes of endocytosis.
Endocytosis, the uptake of material by inward folding of the membrane to form an
internalised vesicle, occurs in several forms suited to different cargo.
Phagocytosis, or cell eating, is the engulfment of large particles — such as
bacteria, debris or dead cells — by specialised cells such as macrophages and
neutrophils, which extend their membrane around the particle to enclose it in a
large vesicle for destruction.
Pinocytosis, or cell drinking, is the non-specific uptake of extracellular fluid
and its dissolved solutes in small vesicles, occurring continuously in many cells.
Receptor-mediated endocytosis is a selective,
efficient uptake in which specific molecules bind receptors that cluster in coated
pits, which then invaginate to internalise the bound cargo — the route for the
uptake of cholesterol-carrying low-density lipoprotein,
of iron-carrying transferrin, and of some hormones.
So endocytosis has subtypes: phagocytosis engulfing large particles,
pinocytosis taking up fluid non-specifically,
and receptor-mediated endocytosis selectively internalising specific molecules via
receptors in coated pits — each matched to its cargo,
and together the means of bulk and selective uptake.
Summarise the physical principles governing movement across membranes.
I would summarise membrane movement as governed by a small set of physical
principles.
Diffusion of lipophilic substances and gases follows Fick's law — rate proportional
to area, gradient and diffusion coefficient and inversely proportional to thickness
— with the diffusion coefficient depending, by Graham's law,
on molecular size and on lipid solubility, and the degree of ionisation,
set by pK-a and pH through the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship,
determining the diffusible fraction.
Water moves by osmosis down its own gradient,
driven by the effective osmotic pressure of impermeant solutes — tonicity —
accelerated by aquaporins. Ions move through gated,
selective channels down their electrochemical gradients.
Movement against a gradient requires energy — directly as adenosine triphosphate in
primary active transport, or from the sodium gradient in secondary transport.
So movement across membranes obeys physical principles:
Fick's law and ionisation for diffusion, osmosis and tonicity for water,
electrochemical gradients through channels for ions,
and energy-coupled pumps and cotransporters for active transport — a physical
framework underlying all cellular exchange and the handling of drugs and
electrolytes.
Describe how the respiratory gases cross the alveolar membrane.
Oxygen and carbon dioxide cross the alveolar-capillary membrane by simple passive
diffusion, down their partial-pressure gradients,
governed by Fick's law of diffusion applied to the lung.
The rate of transfer is proportional to the surface area of the membrane — vast in
the lung — and to the partial-pressure gradient across it,
and to the diffusing capacity of the gas,
and inversely proportional to the thickness of the membrane,
which is normally very thin.
The diffusing capacity depends on the gas's solubility and, by Graham's law,
on its molecular weight.
Although carbon dioxide is the heavier molecule,
its far greater solubility means it diffuses about twenty times more readily than
oxygen, so disturbances of diffusion impair oxygenation before carbon dioxide
elimination.
Thickening of the membrane, as in fibrosis or oedema, or loss of area,
as in emphysema, impairs diffusion.
So the respiratory gases cross the alveolar membrane by passive diffusion governed
by Fick's law — favoured by the large area,
steep gradient and thin membrane — carbon dioxide diffusing far faster than oxygen
owing to its solubility, so that diffusion defects impair oxygenation first.
Describe facilitated diffusion of glucose by the glucose transporters.
Glucose, being water-soluble, cannot cross the lipid membrane by simple diffusion,
so it enters most cells by facilitated diffusion through a family of carrier
proteins, the glucose transporters, or GLUTs.
These carriers bind glucose on one side, change conformation,
and release it on the other, moving it down its concentration gradient without
energy, so they show the saturation,
specificity and competition characteristic of carrier transport.
Different transporters suit different tissues:
some provide constant uptake for the brain and red cells,
while the transporter of muscle and fat, GLUT-four,
is unusual in being insulin-dependent — insulin causes it to be inserted into the
membrane, increasing glucose uptake,
the basis of insulin's hypoglycaemic action and a key point in diabetes.
This is distinct from the active sodium-glucose cotransport that absorbs glucose
against its gradient in gut and kidney.
So glucose enters most cells by facilitated diffusion through the glucose
transporters, saturable carriers moving it down its gradient,
with the insulin-dependent GLUT-four of muscle and fat underlying insulin's
promotion of glucose uptake — distinct from the secondary active cotransport of the
gut and kidney.
What are colligative properties, and how are they used?
Colligative properties are properties of a solution that depend only on the number
of solute particles dissolved, not on their nature.
There are four: the lowering of the vapour pressure,
the elevation of the boiling point, the depression of the freezing point,
and the osmotic pressure. Because each depends on particle number,
each is a measure of the total solute concentration, the osmolality.
This is exploited in the laboratory measurement of osmolality:
an osmometer most commonly measures the depression of the freezing point of a
sample, which is directly proportional to the osmolality,
allowing the total particle concentration to be determined.
Comparing the measured osmolality with that calculated from the known solutes
reveals the osmolar gap, indicating unmeasured solutes such as alcohols.
So colligative properties — vapour-pressure lowering, boiling-point elevation,
freezing-point depression and osmotic pressure — depend only on the number of
solute particles, so each reflects osmolality;
freezing-point depression is the usual basis of its measurement,
and the osmolar gap reveals unmeasured solutes — a physical principle of clinical
use.
Thank you. A thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The cell membrane is a fluid phospholipid bilayer (fluid-mosaic model) — a
hydrophobic core barrier to water-soluble molecules,
with cholesterol regulating fluidity and embedded proteins acting as channels,
carriers, pumps, receptors and recognition molecules.
Second, Passive transport needs no energy and moves down the gradient:
simple diffusion of lipophilic substances/gases through the bilayer (Fick's law —
rate proportional to area, concentration gradient and diffusion coefficient,
inversely proportional to thickness);
facilitated diffusion via channels/carriers (saturable);
osmosis of water (accelerated by aquaporins).
Third, Ion channels are selective, gated protein pores (voltage-gated,
ligand-gated, mechanically gated, leak) giving rapid passive ion flow;
carriers bind and shuttle substrates more slowly with saturation and specificity,
as uniporters, symporters or antiporters.
Fourth, Active transport moves against the gradient:
primary active transport uses ATP directly (the Na/K pump extrudes 3 Na for 2 K per
ATP — electrogenic, maintaining the gradients for excitability);
secondary active transport uses the sodium gradient (symport e.g.
Na-glucose; antiport e.g. Na-Ca exchanger);
endocytosis/exocytosis move bulk material.
Fifth, In anaesthesia, the lipid bilayer and degree of ionisation (pKa/pH) govern
drug crossing and pH partitioning (local anaesthetics less effective in acidic
infected tissue); ion channels are the targets of local (Na channel block) and
general anaesthetics; ion pumps maintain the excitability that anaesthesia
Thank you. That concludes the station.